docs/overview.md, before:

# Overview

This repository contains tools and test suites for benchmarking and running the FLAIR long-read transcriptome analysis pipeline, including alignment, correction, collapse, and quantification. It is designed to facilitate reproducible evaluation of transcript detection methods across various organisms, protocols, and parameter sets.

## Glossary of Terms

This section defines conventions used across the repo 

(TBD).

---

## Master Data Directory

All full input datasets should be stored under:

(TBD).

---

### Expected Directory Name Format

Each experiment should follow a naming convention that includes organism, reference annotation, sample name, sequencing platform, and optional 5' or 3' protocol descriptors.

```
<organism>_<reference>_<sample>_<sequencing>_<5pseq>_<3pseq>
```
---

### Example Data Directory Layout

```plaintext
flair-test-suite/
└── tests/
    └── data/
        └── human_GENCODEv48_WTC11_PacBio_CAGE_QuantSeq/
            ├── sample.gtf
            ├── sample_reads.fastq
            ├── reference.fastq
            ├── reference TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            ├── experiment TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            └── reference splice junction BED file
        └── human_GENCODEv48_WTC11_Nanopore/
            ├── sample.gtf
            ├── sample_reads.fastq
            ├── reference.fastq
            ├── reference TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            └── reference splice junction BED file
```

---

## Editing the Manifest

The manifest file defines what regions and pipeline settings to use. You can extend its scope by adding new entries to any of the following sections.

---

### Adding a New Region

Each chromosome key maps to a list of coordinate ranges in the format "chr:start-end". Each cooridinate range will be processed independently.

To add a new genomic region for processing :
- Locate the `regions` section in your manifest file
- Add a new dictionary to the existing coordinate range list of dictionaries with your desired range. (ex : `{chr1:140000-150000}`)

---

### Adding a New FLAIR Option Set (Align, Correct, Collapse, Quantify)

The manifest includes separate lists for different stages of the FLAIR pipeline: `align_options`, `correct_options`,`collapse_options`, `quantify_options`. Each list contains dictionaries, where each dictionary specifies a distinct set of flags for that step.

To add a new configuration to any of these stages:
- Append a new dictionary with the desired flags to the appropriate list.
- Each configuration will trigger an independent run of the relevant FLAIR stage.

---

Commit message:

added framework location for creating a new version

docs/overview.md, after:

# FLAIR Test Suite Overview

This repository provides tools and test suites for running and benchmarking different versions of the FLAIR long-read transcriptome analysis pipeline—including alignment, correction, collapse, and quantification. It is designed to support reproducible evaluation of transcript detection methods across a variety of organisms, sequencing protocols, and parameter configurations.

---

## Glossary of Terms

This section defines conventions used across the repo 

(TBD).

---


## Master Data Directory

All full input datasets should be stored under:

(TBD).

---

### Expected Directory Name Format

Each experiment should follow a naming convention that includes organism, reference annotation, sample name, sequencing platform, and optional 5' or 3' protocol descriptors.

```
<organism>_<reference>_<sample>_<sequencing>_<5pseq>_<3pseq>
```
---

### Example Data Directory Layout

```plaintext
flair-test-suite/
└── tests/
    └── data/
        └── human_GENCODEv48_WTC11_PacBio_CAGE_QuantSeq/
            ├── sample.gtf
            ├── sample_reads.fastq
            ├── reference.fastq
            ├── reference TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            ├── experiment TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            └── reference splice junction BED file
        └── human_GENCODEv48_WTC11_Nanopore/
            ├── sample.gtf
            ├── sample_reads.fastq
            ├── reference.fastq
            ├── reference TSS/TTS BED file(s)
            └── reference splice junction BED file
```

## Manifest File


The manifest file defines what version of FLAIR, regions, and pipeline settings to use.

Open `manifest.py` to define:

1. **datasets**: subfolder names → expected filenames.  
2. **regions**: a list of `{ "chrN": ["start:end", …] }` dicts.  
3. **stage options** (`align_options`, `correct_options`, `collapse_options`, `quantify_options`):  
   - Each entry must include  
     - `version`: FLAIR release (e.g. `"3.0.0"`)  
     - `env`: corresponding conda env (e.g. `"flair-v3"`)  
     - `flags`: a dict of CLI arguments supported by that version  

Appending extra configs automatically spawns independent runs for each parameter set.

---

### Adding a New Version

(TBD)

---

### Adding a New Region

Each chromosome key maps to a list of coordinate ranges in the format "chr:start-end". Each cooridinate range will be processed independently.

To add a new genomic region for processing :
- Locate the `regions` section in your manifest file
- Add a new dictionary to the existing coordinate range list of dictionaries with your desired range. (ex : `{chr1:140000-150000}`)

---

### Adding a New FLAIR Option Set (Align, Correct, Collapse, Quantify)

The manifest includes separate lists for different stages of the FLAIR pipeline: `align_options`, `correct_options`,`collapse_options`, `quantify_options`. Each list contains dictionaries, where each dictionary specifies a distinct set of flags for that step.

To add a new configuration to any of these stages:
- Append a new dictionary with the desired flags to the appropriate list.
- Each configuration will trigger an independent run of the relevant FLAIR stage.

---
